Good afternoon.
Hello and welcome to the
FireWire Mac OS X Overview.
Today,
we'd like to review the current status of
the FireWire hardware on the Macintosh,
summarize the functionality
of FireWire on Mac OS X,
review some recent developer
products and activities,
review some details regarding the
FireWire technology specifically,
and touch on 1394b,
the next generation of FireWire.
Of course, we'll have some demos too.
First thing I'd like to touch on
is that FireWire is available on
100% of the Macintosh platform.
That's new for this year.
FireWire is an integral part of the
Macintosh connectivity strategy.
And if you make a FireWire device,
you can be sure that the Macintosh
product line will provide ports
for your device to connect to.
FireWire Hardware Overview.
All of the products have 400
megabits per second interface,
two ports on the desktop,
Those are the iMac, the G4 Tower,
and the Cube.
And one port on portables,
that's the iBook and the PowerBook G4.
They all provide cable power,
and that's for giving power
to hard drives and to hubs.
and they have the six pin
connector which is easy to use,
it's very durable, and it's the only one
that provides cable power.
They're also OpenHCI compliant,
which is the industry standard,
and implement 1394a,
which is the latest update to the spec,
including bug fixes and
performance enhancements.
FireWire on Mac OS X is equivalent
in functionality to Mac OS 9.1.
including a built-in DV driver
for QuickTime applications,
DV capture, export, device control.
And it also includes built-in mass
storage drivers for hard disks,
MO drives, CD drives.
The default mass storage
drivers are reliable,
they provide good performance,
precludes need for implementing
and installing other
drivers from third parties.
However, it doesn't preclude third
party developers to write their
own drivers to add additional
capabilities such as performance or
encryption of the data on the drive.
I'd like to spend some time comparing
some terminology of the drivers
for FireWire on Mac OS 9 and 10.
Initially there's a driver description
on Mac OS 9 that can be found
in the driver's code fragment.
On Mac OS X, that's in the bundle.
The driver description is used for
driver matching and driver loading.
The scheduling is very similar
on Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X for
calling into your driver.
Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X support
synchronous and asynchronous calls.
Additionally, on Mac OS X,
the driver framework provides a
foundation for your driver development.
Previously on Mac OS 9, USB, SCSI,
FireWire all had their own way
of driver matching and loading.
On Mac OS X,
driver matching and loading is based
on common services provided by I/O Kit.
So I'd like to go over a few
things that's been happening in the
FireWire space over the last year.
There's a whole bunch of new
peripherals in every category.
A wide range from smart card readers,
To RAID systems from digital
still cameras to television sets.
There's an increasing convergence
between computers and consumer
electronics with respect to FireWire.
I'd like to note one of the devices on
the screen in the lower left is the Sanyo
ID Shot that uses SPB-2 via FireWire,
has lots of storage,
supports video stills and motion video,
and FireWire was chosen since
it is the best interface
available for this product.
There are a lot of new mass storage
FireWire devices supporting between 15
and 20 megabits per second performance
with new devices on the way.
Additionally,
there are some RAID storage systems.
These provide effective, convenient,
large-capacity storage systems.
They're very friendly and
they're very easy to use.
And it takes advantage of
FireWire's plug-and-play technology.
There are DVD players.
This one can hold up to 200 DVDs.
It's a single highest capacity
storage device and 200 DVDs can
store well over a terabyte of data.
There are scanners for FireWire.
These provide significant
increased performance compared
to alternative interfaces.
They can be shared with any
Macintosh on the FireWire bus,
and all of the legacy
interfaces do not allow this.
There are a number of interfaces
you can select between for
your device to support.
And here are some things to consider
when selecting your device interface.
If you need more than
a megabyte per second,
then FireWire is your choice.
Often, in standard user configurations,
there will be multiple
devices on the bus,
so you should also consider
bandwidth headroom for your
device in that scenario.
Additionally,
if you have a device that requires
greater than 700k per second throughput,
well, then FireWire is your choice also.
There's been a good deal of talk
about the Digital Hub concept lately,
and Apple is very excited about using
the Macintosh as the Digital Hub.
I'd like to go over some topics
relating FireWire to the digital
hub and how your device can
benefit from being part of this.
The Mac is the center of the digital hub,
and FireWire is the
connectivity for this hub.
Your devices will play in this
arena if they support FireWire,
and the applications will benefit
from supporting these devices also.
Another thing is customers will gain
value with their peripherals because they
can use them together in conjunction with
the other devices on the FireWire bus.
I'd like to introduce Eric Anderson,
the manager of the
FireWire software team,
and we're going to go through
a couple of performance demos.
The first thing we'd like to
demonstrate is DV Capture on OS X.
It's a pretty good real-time
example of performance from OS X of
the FireWire software stack.
So what you're seeing is Play-Through
right now on the computer,
and let's do a little bit of a capture.
It's 30 frames per second
frame-accurate capture.
So we'll select that clip,
do a little playback.
You can see how nice and smooth it is.
We can also do full screen if you
want to see the real performance.
This is new since last year.
Last year in Mac OS X we
couldn't show you any kind of DV.
Now we have iMovie running just like
nothing unusual would happen to it.
Not that anything
unusual did happen to it.
The next demo we'd like to show is
performance to an external FireWire disk.
It's about 15 megabytes per second.
Last year at this time we had
an experimental disk driver.
Now we are shipping default disk
drivers in Mac OS X that are reliable
and provide good performance.
And we'll see that right now.
This is copying from the
external drive onto the internal.
That's it.
That was 129 megabytes.
That's the end of the demo.
Let's go back to the slides.
So many choices.
Okay, I'm going to tell you now a little
more detail about FireWire technology.
This is the introductory session.
We have a whole other session
tomorrow at this time about
programming for FireWire on Mac OS X.
I'm just going to cover some
of the basics that everybody
needs to know about FireWire.
What is, I'm sure most of you know this,
but what is FireWire?
Why do we call it a serial bus?
What's IEEE 1394?
IEEE 1394 is an industry standard
that specifies this technology.
FireWire is just a name that
Apple uses when we talk about 1394.
It's a little easier
to remember than 1394.
We've made a lot of effort to
make this name widely known.
It has excellent customer recognition.
We would like you to use
the name FireWire also.
To do that, you need a license from us,
which is free.
You can also get the FireWire
logo from us for free.
It's in the same license.
There's details in the
URL on the Q&A slide.
So what's a serial bus?
Why does this matter?
A serial bus,
as opposed to a parallel interface,
means that data flows serially,
one bit at a time.
This means that the data can go long
distances with ease because very few
wires are required to carry the signal.
On a parallel interface like
SCSI or PCI or PC parallel port,
many wires carry the signal in parallel.
That works fine for
short distances like PCI.
But over a long distance it's very
difficult because on each of those
lines the bits will show up at
slightly different times because
of different lengths in the cable.
A serial bus doesn't have this problem,
so a serial bus can go
long distances with a thin,
friendly, easy-to-use cable.
And why is it called a bus?
A bus is a technology where
everybody sees the same messages.
Everyone is sharing the
same communication media.
This is different from, say,
the internet,
where packets are routed from
node to node depending on
where they're trying to go.
On a bus, if I say something,
everyone hears it.
Generally, most of them will ignore it,
but the one person who really wanted
the message will listen to it.
Why is a bus good for 1394?
A bus is really low-cost because
you don't have any routing logic.
You simply send the message,
everyone gets it.
The person who it's for sees that
it's for them and receives it.
Everyone else ignores it.
So a serial bus is a very low-cost,
high-performance,
customer-friendly solution,
and that's why this technology
was adopted in FireWire.
So what have we done
recently in FireWire?
As Greg mentioned,
all of our products today have the
industry standard 1394 OpenHCI.
They all have 1394a-2000,
which is the very latest
revision of the specification.
Nothing changed from a
functional point of view,
but 1394a brings us bug fixes,
clears up ambiguities in the spec,
has some performance
improvements in the arbitration.
So that's in all of our products now.
As Greg mentioned,
all of our products provide cable power.
The Fire in FireWire can be
considered the cable power.
This allows you to run hard drives, hubs,
cameras, innovative new devices that
hopefully some of you will ship.
This sets FireWire apart
from other interfaces.
There's much more power
available on FireWire.
All of our products today
support all FireWire speeds:
100 megabit for your camcorders,
400 megabit for your hard drives,
200 megabit for that oddball device that
somebody shipped that's 200 megabits.
They're out there,
but they're hard to find.
We also support booting from
FireWire in all of our devices.
This works in Mac OS 9
and it works in Mac OS X.
You can use a FireWire hard drive to
boot any computer that we sell today.
This is more convenient than you
might think if you have a tendency
to do bad things to your hard drive.
And finally,
we have what's called Target Disk Mode in
all of our products today.
Target Disk Mode is like SCSI Disk Mode.
If you remember back when
PowerBooks had SCSI interfaces,
you could reboot the PowerBook with
a special SCSI cable connected,
and it would act as if
it was a disk drive.
You could connect it to another Macintosh
through that SCSI port and see all
the files on the desktop in a volume.
Well, we don't have SCSI on any
of our products anymore,
but we have FireWire on all of them.
So we've implemented
Target Disk Mode in FireWire.
It's essentially the same idea,
but there's a couple of key differences.
SCSI Disk Mode was limited
to portable computers.
FireWire Disk Mode is available
in everything we sell.
Just like booting from FireWire,
this is more useful than you may realize.
If you haven't tried Target Disk Mode,
it's very easy to do.
I'm going to demonstrate it.
Give it a try.
You'll find it may be a very easy way
to move files from one computer to
another using just a FireWire cable.
Target Disk Mode is
implemented in Open Firmware,
so you simply reboot the computer
and hold down the letter "T".
The computer that you're connecting it to
needs to be running Mac OS 9 or Mac OS X.
If you have Mac OS 9,
you need FireWire support
version 2.3.3 or later.
If you're running Mac OS X,
it's just built in and ready to go.
So let's switch to the
split-screen demos now.
Okay, up here we have two PowerMac G4
systems hiding under this table.
One of them is already
in target disk mode.
I simply held down the
letter T while booting it.
It displays this delightful
dancing FireWire icon to tell
you it's in target disk mode.
The other machine is running Mac OS X.
Connect the FireWire cable between them.
and all the volumes from the machine
in target disk mode become available
on the machine running Mac OS X.
I don't need all three of these.
There's three partitions on this drive.
They simply show up as
three FireWire volumes.
I can copy a file over target disk mode
just by dragging it like any other file.
So if you haven't tried this,
you can see how easy it is.
Just take any two of
our current products.
Doesn't need to be a portable.
Reboot one of them,
hold down the letter T,
wait till you see the
dancing FireWire icon,
plug it into the other one,
and it will show up on the desktop.
There's one other thing
we've changed from last year.
If you were paying attention,
you've already noticed it.
This is now much faster
than it was last year.
It's more than 500% faster.
This is that same 129 megabyte
file that Greg copied earlier.
It's not quite as fast as a
native FireWire hard drive,
but it's a huge improvement.
Okay, let's go back to the slides.
Now, this year we have something
completely new to talk about:
IEEE 1394b.
This is the future of FireWire.
1394b is coming.
People have been working
on this for a long time.
This is an enhancement to the FireWire
standard that's backwards compatible
but offers a lot of new features.
We are going to incorporate
1394b in our products.
I'm not allowed to say when,
but now would be a good
time for you to start making
peripherals to connect to us.
1394b brings much higher speed.
800 megabits is the starting point.
1600 megabits is also possible.
These are a factor of two
improvements over the 400 megabit
interface that we have today.
Another big new feature in 1394b is
the support for long-haul cables.
FireWire today is limited to
about 4.5 meters per cable.
1394b defines some optional new media,
such as optical fiber,
that can stretch this by
a factor of 10 or more,
50 meters or beyond.
This will really open up FireWire
to some new application areas.
For example,
consider a professional music
studio or a theater application
where you might want to send
digital audio fairly long distances.
Or consider an industrial
application where,
for safety reasons,
you might want a hefty amount of
distance between your FireWire
device and the person who's
actually operating the computer.
What makes 1394B faster?
It's not just 800 and 1600 megabits.
1394B has a new mode of operation called,
"Beta Mode." We didn't simply double the
clock rate for what we're doing before.
If you're communicating at 800, or 1600,
or using any of the new media,
you'll be communicating in Beta Mode.
Beta Mode has many arbitration
improvements to give higher performance.
In particular, the arbitration is done in
parallel with communication.
So while I'm sending
a packet to somebody,
the arbitration takes place in parallel
for who gets to use the bus next.
This means you can get
essentially 100% utilization of
the bus for payload transfer,
whereas today,
some small amount of the bus
is used up in arbitration.
So 800 megabits is not just twice
as fast as where we are today,
it's even a little bit faster than that.
The 1394b standard has been
in work for a long time.
It passed its official
ballot with the IEEE.
The ballot review committee is
now incorporating all of the
feedback that they got as far
as typos and clarifications.
It's in its final edit mode right now.
This is the time to start
working on products with 1394b.
If you're a developer and you need
silicon to implement a 1394b product,
talk to Greg or talk to our developer
relations and we'll put you in contact
with people who can provide that silicon.
One of the most visible changes to
customers from 1394b is that there are
going to be some changes to the cable.
In particular,
there's a new connector for 1394b,
which has nine pins,
as opposed to the six-pin
connector that we have today.
At first glance,
this may seem undesirable
because it's yet another change,
but there's a really
good reason for this.
All the cables that have been sold
to date can't go 800 megabits,
and they're not going to work well if
you plug them into the new technology.
So a new connector that is qualified
for this speed has been defined so
that it can be attached to new cables
that are also qualified for this speed.
The 9-pin connector still
uses ordinary copper ports.
It's about the same size as the
6-pin connector that we have today.
It has 9 pins because they've
added individual signal grounds
for the twisted pair lines in order
to improve the signal quality.
There's also a 9th pin for
cable detect that gives us some
flexibility for future enhancements.
The key thing about this connector is
that it's still a copper interface.
And this means that if you attach
it to silicon that is bilingual,
you can have full compatibility
with existing FireWire devices,
because we use a copper interface
on the connection today.
A bilingual FireWire port is capable
of operating at all of today's speeds
and at least one of 1394b speeds,
and it will automatically detect
what kind of equipment it's connected
to and communicate accordingly.
When we have products with
this 9-pin connector on them,
the customers will need
two new kinds of cable.
It's really very simple.
There will be a cable with a
9-pin connector on one end and a
6-pin connector on the other end.
This will enable you to use
any of today's peripherals
with a 1394b-capable computer.
There's also a cable with a
9-pin connector on one end and a
4-pin connector on the other end.
This enables direct connection to all
of today's camcorders and other devices
that have that little 4-pin connector.
This cable is just a piece of wire.
It doesn't have any circuits in it.
There's nothing expensive about it.
So it should be really very easy
for customers to move to 1394b
just by replacing one or two
of the cables in their system.
All of the cables they have
today connect to the 1394b.
The only thing you need to do is connect
the cable to the computer that has 1394b.
Of course, there's also a cable with
9-pin connectors at both ends,
and that's used for a device and a
computer that have 1394b together.
As hardware developers,
we hope that you will
use the 9-pin connector,
but we hope that you'll use it correctly.
Because it's a new connector
and it represents something
better in the future,
it may be very tempting to
try to use it right away.
You must use the 9-pin connector
if you have a 1394b PHY,
the physical layer interface chip,
in your device.
You have to use that connector
in order to communicate
correctly at the new high speeds.
It simply won't work
on the old connector.
But here's the important point.
You must only use the new
connector if you have real
1394b silicon in your product.
This is really important.
We've heard people say, "Oh,
I can put that connector on my
products today." Don't do that.
This will cause big
problems for customers,
massive confusion.
Do not put the new connector on an old,
non-1394b device, and don't put the old
connectors on a 1394b device.
If your device speaks 1394b,
it must have only 1394b connectors.
Just let the customer buy the right
cable to connect it to whatever
they want to connect it for.
Don't try to be fancy and use
the wrong connector because
they can recycle a cable.
That will just create chaos.
Everybody clear on that?
This is going to be a quiz.
Okay, backwards compatibility.
We know Macintosh customers
love backwards compatibility.
1394b is designed to be
fully backwards compatible.
All of the significant changes in
1394b are in the physical layer.
This is called the PHY.
This is the silicon that actually
connects to the wire that drives
the twisted pair lines and sends
bits up and down the cable.
New devices that have 1394b in them
can be directly connected to old
1394a and even 1394-1995 hardware.
New devices can work with the old
hardware at the old hardware speeds.
For example, all of the computers we've
ever sold with FireWire could
connect to a 1394b hard drive.
They'd simply connect
to it at 400 megabits.
A future computer might
connect to it at 800 megabits.
So you can make a device with
1394b and you're not locking
out any part of the market.
The millions of machines we've
already sold can use your device.
Similarly, old devices and software can
work with your new device,
and they'll work just as
fast as they always have.
Your camcorder will continue
to work at 100 megabits.
Your scanner will continue
to work at 400 megabits.
Nothing gets any worse if
you connect it to 1394B.
And if all your devices,
or any of your devices, are 1394B,
they can communicate amongst
themselves at the new high speed.
So it's very flexible, very easy to use.
Nobody's been ruled out.
It should be a very pleasant
experience for customers.
Just use the right connector.
So what are we changing
in software for 1394b?
Almost nothing.
A lot of software guys had their
hand in designing this spec,
so what a great outcome.
If you're writing a device driver
or you're writing an application,
you probably don't have
to change anything.
People today using our API don't specify
the speed they want to communicate at.
We simply give them the
best possible speed.
That continues to be true with 1394b.
If your device can do it,
we'll send it a packet at
800 or even 1600 megabits.
In the core FireWire services,
the actual operating system,
very few changes are required.
We need to add a couple bits to
keep track of the new high speeds.
That's about it.
We expect to have no trouble
delivering that well in
advance of anyone needing it.
1394b also defines optical fiber,
as I mentioned earlier.
This is a way to go much greater
distances than you can today.
50 meters, even 100 meters,
is defined at various speeds
on 1394b with optical fiber.
This is not for everybody.
A 100-meter cable,
100-meter FireWire cable is great.
But if I'm burning DVDs
on my FireWire DVD drive,
it's not going to do me much good to put
the drive 300 feet away from my computer.
That's kind of inconvenient.
Now,
if I've got a FireWire security camera,
or maybe a FireWire
microphone out in the studio,
that would be a great use for fiber.
But a lot of devices don't need this.
We recommend that most devices simply
use the copper connector because
customers who need fiber can purchase
a FireWire hub that has copper on
one side and fiber on the other side.
1394b is designed so that all that's
needed in such a hub is a PHY plus
whatever fiber optic transceiver you
need for the kind of fiber that's in use.
So the hub does not have to be expensive.
Anyone who wants to go long distance,
even with their DVD burner,
could get two of these hubs,
run fiber between them,
and go great distances.
But most devices really
aren't going to need this.
So just consider fiber as something
that enables new applications,
not something that has
to be on every camcorder.
I certainly don't expect to
see it on any camcorders.
Okay,
I'd like to ask Greg to come back up.
Greg's going to tell you about the
resources that we make available to you,
FireWire developers,
in order to encourage you to
develop hardware and software
that uses FireWire on Macintosh.
Once Greg's done,
then we will both be back for Q&A.
I'd like to point you guys at some
resources that are available to
help give you some information for
doing FireWire software development.
One of the most important things
is our software development kit,
and that can be found at
the URL listed on the page.
Additionally, we have email resources
that you can utilize.
One of them is firewire@apple.com,
which basically goes right to me.
And if you have some questions that you
want to talk directly to Apple about,
you can send the question there.
It tends to be less technical
than the technical FireWire
questions mailing list,
which is comprised of
both Apple engineering and
third-party software developers,
so you can get some fairly quick
responses to some of your more
difficult technical questions by
sending them to that mailing list.
Additionally, I wanted to mention one
thing about the SDK.
It contains two new debugging tools that
were previously unavailable with the SDK,
Firebug and Firecracker,
which are very useful for
debugging your FireWire devices.
I'd like to summarize some things
to do for you to generate your
FireWire device to fit into the
FireWire world much more easily.
First of all,
please take advantage of bus power.
We provide it.
It makes a much better
customer experience,
and the product is much more successful
in the marketplace by using BuzzPower.
We provide bus power
on all of our products,
including portables,
and you can see the values there.
Additionally, take advantage of the
multi-host topology.
This is very useful for FireWire
devices such as scanners or printers
where you can connect it to the
FireWire bus and any Macintosh on the
FireWire bus can utilize the device.
Additionally,
please recognize that the 1394a
specifies a range of 8 to 30 volts.
You should tolerate the full range
within this spec and preferably
operate in this range because you
will encounter devices on the bus
You will encounter devices on the
bus in this range of the spec.
Some other things to do:
Use the standard 6 or
9 pin connector only.
Use the 400 megabit per second
PHY or faster for your devices.
Additionally,
you should provide two or three
connectors for large devices.
Customers enjoy daisy-chaining
devices together and you don't want
to be a dead end in the firewire bus.
Previous history SCSI devices that had
only one SCSI port on them didn't fare
too well in the marketplace because
customers were really interested in
daisy-chaining these devices together.
And we're experiencing a similar
trend with FireWire devices.
Also, please use a unique serial number.
This is very important.
For example, if you have two devices,
let's say if you're a
disk drive manufacturer,
you have two drives.
If they don't have unique serial numbers,
the drivers will not be loaded
properly by the operating system
because that's how we go about
identifying the devices on the bus.
Additionally, during a bus reset,
the unique serial number is very
important because this is how the
FireWire bus configures and knows about
the devices on the FireWire bus itself.
One final note,
please don't use the minimal ROM.
That's the 4-byte ROM.
One of the main reasons we recommend
against using that is there is no
GUID included in the minimal ROM.
Please take advantage of
the FireWire logo licensing.
As Eric mentioned,
it's free and it's available.
Additionally, for the Mac logo,
you can license that and get
it at the same location that
you can get the FireWire logo.
Market research has shown that the
FireWire logo is very recognizable,
more recognizable than other 1394 logos,
and customers tend to purchase
products which have the FireWire logo.
So take advantage of that.
I'd like to review some related sessions
that we're going to be having this week.
One is a FireWire in-depth session,
which is going to be at
the Civic Auditorium.
That's actually across the street
and will be there tomorrow afternoon.
There's a feedback forum on Thursday.
And finally,
there's a FireWire Plugfest on
the Apple campus in the Piano Bar.
Come by, look at a bunch of devices,
have some fun, and drink some beer.
Bring?
Oh, bring devices too.
It's a plug fest.
You're supposed to bring devices.
Here's some contact information.
You can send an email to
me at firewire@apple.com or
additionally my counterpart,
Greg Keithley, who's the FireWire and
USB technology manager.
You can contact him directly also.